so contrasting atheism and nihilism we
have to emphasize again ithi ISM alone
does not reject communism atheism alone
does not reject for example the belief
that you could meet and speak to the
ghost of your deceased grandfather
atheism alone does not reject
Transcendental Meditation reincarnation
or junk science claims about health and
diet such as the wonder-percent meat
diet so atheism is a very specific and
narrow rejection of one type of belief
it's easiest to imagine with a foreign
repressive far away culture or like
Saudi Arabia that living in a state of
rebellion against the ideologue
underpinnings of your society living in
a state where you refuse to believe in
the justifications for your society not
just religious but underpinning the
economic system so on and so forth that
that could be a really positive
liberating motivating thing in your life
where you feel driven to do something
better than play out the role you were
born into who you know you feel
motivated to rise above the conventions
of the society or in to move beyond the
constraints of the beliefs that define
the culture that to you is most familiar
as I say maybe you would move beyond the
constraints of any culture or every
culture the misconceptions about
nihilism are strangely parallel to a
pious Christians misconceptions about
atheism and yet hilariously the people
who are most staunch in their critique
of nihilism are themselves most often
atheists offer is not a nihilist because
he rejects the epistemological axioms of
society no he's a nihilist because
society has rejected him there's a
profound and unexamined assumption that
anyone who becomes an iOS anyone who
espouses nihilism is someone so
unfortunate that they're offering a sort
of terrifying last gasp with desperation
before giving up on life that nihilism
is part of a downward spiral of self
pitying behavior but people who have no
other choice no other way to get a
or I don't know no other way to rekindle
their optimism about their own lives or
what the society they're living in
imagine how laughable that same opinion
is when it comes from a pious Christian
or a pious Muslim in their attitude
towards atheists when they say to you
and they do that oh it's just poor
unfortunate unlucky people people who
are poverty-stricken people who had a
tough life they end up turning to
atheism because they can no longer
believe that you know God has been
generous enough to them whereas people
who've had a lucky enjoyable happy
optimistic sort of life those people
feel gratitude for all the good things
God is supposedly done for them and they
remain where they just hurt me there
they remain religious conformist favors
of society I try to combine them into
one word their religious conformist
members of society it's very clear why a
pious Christian a pious Muslim would
have that view but it sounds to us like
the most unsophisticated bumpkin
nonsense we haven't quite gotten over
the snobbery of pious atheists looking
down their noses at nihilism in much the
same way now is this partly a
misunderstanding about what nihilism is
what it means yeah but it doesn't take
much of a thought experiment to put
yourself in a position where you could
recognize nihilism being an uplifting
positive motivating factor of a person's
life or it could be something joyous
could be something that sparks the sort
of sense of rebellion in them a
rebellion against a society they despise
a rebellion against a social role
they've been born into where they say no
I'm not gonna believe in any of the
things underpinning the status quo in
the society I'm not going to be a
conformist I'm not going to play this
role I'm not merely going to reject the
belief in the God that this society
respects I'm going to reject the belief
in the economic system the social system
the hierarchy the mode of political
organization I don't believe in any of
it anymore so someone who is an atheist
in Saudi Arabia
loses faith in God but
by definition in God only wouldn't you
regard it as a tremendously powerful
thing
if someone in Saudi Arabia instead got
interested in nihilism they stopped
believing in God they also stopped
believing in the monarchy they stopped
believing in aristocracy they stopped
believing in all of the excuses and
glorifications in propaganda that makes
their country's social order seem to
make sense to its members or its
participants wouldn't you regard
nihilism as something liberating and
positive for someone raised as a true
believing communist for example right
now in communist China but then at one
point they challenged the beliefs their
parents have given him they challenged
the assumptions they were born into they
stopped believing not in God because
communism is an atheist system they
stopped believing in the underpinnings
of that worldview of that social system
of that history and of the excuses for
particular massacres the
rationalizations and so on and so forth
it's very significant that still to this
day the Communist Party of China
describes its enemies as historical
nihilists that's a tradition that dates
back to you know 1917 in Russia in
Russia the nihilists were a formally
organized political party of some
historical significance and they were
ultimately hunted down and killed by the
communists who's very sad in any case
the Russian nihilists are one very
interesting you know flashpoint in the
history of nihilism to be examined but
the idea that communism defines itself
in terms of a set of beliefs that must
struggle against nihilism that has
endured long beyond 1917 in Russia and
it still goes on today in China in order
to be a good member of Chinese society
you must believe in history you must
believe in the propaganda about history
presented by the Communist Party and the
people who reject that teaching the
people who do not believe they're the
enemies of the party who are called
historical nihilus I consider myself an
historical nihilist I grew up with two
parents who were both true believing
communists and I had to reject I had to
outgrow the religion of my family and
that involved a rejection of communism
not rejecting a faith in God but
rejecting faith in many other things
including
rejecting a faith in different economic
abstractions different beliefs about
economics that help to define the
communist worldview so coming to the
definition of nihilism as rapidly as
possible we can do it through a contrast
of atheism versus nihilism
here's slide one atheism can be
approximately summed up with the phrase
quote I do not believe in God close
quote but more precisely this means
there is nothing to be believed in in
this category of things called god or
gods etc now why is that clarification
meaningful or useful we'll make the
comparison to someone who refuses to use
fluoride toothpaste because they find
the scientific argument for its
advantages unconvincing they could be
accurately described as stating quote I
do not believe in fluoride right so
their position is not that there was no
such thing as fluoride to be believed in
they just specifically do not believe in
the scientific rationale for using
fluoride and yeah as the photographs
show here on screen there are
significant numbers of people who have
that belief or have that lack of belief
so contrasting atheism and nihilism we
have to emphasize again ithi ISM alone
does not reject communism atheism alone
does not reject for example the belief
that you could meet and speak to the
ghost of your deceased grandfather
atheism alone does not reject
Transcendental Meditation reincarnation
or junk science claims about health and
diet such as the 1% meat diet so atheism
is a very specific and narrow rejection
of one type of belief so whereas the
atheists say there are no God's to be
believed in nihilists say there is
nothing to be believed and we can narrow
down this category of nothing just a
little bit there is not anything in the
category of things that this society
presents as ought to be believed in or
perhaps there's nothing in the category
that any society could ever present as
ought to be believed in I wouldn't
believe in any of it
by way of illustration here it's easy to
tell yourself if I had lived in Nazi
Germany I wouldn't have believed in any
of that stuff although the quality of
the scientific and political arguments
presented by Adolf Hitler were abysmally
poor the human tendency to believe
whatever society presents as ought to be
believed in is very powerful even with
reference to extremely poor work of
literature like Hitler's Mein Kampf or
most of the major religions textbooks
think about living in communist China
right now think about living in post
genocide Canada right now I think it is
true that nihilism entails that you live
in a sort of state of constant rebellion
or constant friction with the society
that you're living in however the extent
of that rebellion the nature of that
rebellion is going to be very different
in different social contexts it's not
going to be the same in Canada in 2019
as it would be in Saudi Arabia Communist
China Hong Kong and it's not gonna be
the same in these social conditions as
it would have been in Russia back in
1917 we're really you know rebellion
against the bolsheviks of any kind was
immediately risking your life it was
immediately a life or death struggle
with ideological extremists however it's
really false to presume that this state
of rebellion is a negative self pitying
resignation to your life being miserable
and terrible and bad poor little me it's
not like that it's not like that for
most of us it's not like that for most
of us who come on the internet and talk
about nihilism and by the way I get fan
mail from people for whom nihilism has
been a really positive motivating force
in their lives
I get fan mail from people who
discovered nihilism from my YouTube
channel and then went off and read a
bunch of books and then send me email
telling me what a positive thing
nihilism has been in their lives so
again it's easiest to imagine with a
foreign repressive far away culture or
like Saudi Arabia that living in a state
of rebellion against the ideological
underpinnings of your society living in
a state where you refuse to believe in
the justifications for your society not
just religious but underpinning the
economic system so on and so forth that
that could be a really positive
liberating motivating thing in your life
where you feel driven to do something
better then play out the role you were
born into if you know you feel motivated
to rise above the conventions of the
society or in to move beyond the
constraints of the beliefs that define
the culture that to you is most familiar
as I say maybe you would move beyond the
constraints of any culture or every
culture I don't know maybe if you took
someone out of Saudi Arabia and they
went to live in Switzerland they would
find conditions in Switzerland good
enough they wouldn't feel that same
tension but the tension could be
productive and inspirational so to give
one example from my own life said this
many times for me living in Canada
really is morally tantamount to living
in a hypothetical Germany where the
Nazis won the war all right Canada is
built on genocide all right and I refuse
to accept that I don't believe in any of
the excuses or rationales I don't
believe any of the justifications for
that genocide no how did I cope with
that tension well I didn't choose to
move to a cave in the countryside and
isolate myself from society I respond to
in a somewhat productive somewhat
creative way by trying to learn creative
way at one point I was actually enrolled
in a university getting a university
degree in Korean enjoy as languages and
I saw a future for myself in Canada
where I was working in language
education and research and
revitalization efforts to try to prevent
those languages from going extinct so
that was ultimately a kind of productive
meaningful response at however I did
that believing in nothing and I did it
precisely because I reject the belief
system of the British Empire even the
belief system my own parents subscribed
to the kind of air SATs belief system
the whole society is based on where they
ultimately have to believe in their own
goodness the goodness of their society
their home their whole lives
notwithstanding the fact that it's built
on genocide and that genocide is still
continuing and they're still
participating in it and they're not
doing anything about it are complaining
against it so based on that rejection of
beliefs on a really kind of nihilistic
basis I threw myself into learning
Korean ageia play with a passion and I
saw a career path where I could do
something it's kind of humanitarian and
meaningful reacting against a rebellion
against the society it was I was living
in that's a completely different set of
motivations than someone who for example
someone who believes in the ghosts of
their ancestors actually existing
someone who uses hallucinogenic drugs at
a powwow
in a tent has visions and then decides
on that basis decides on the basis of a
pious adherence to the religion of their
ancestors on the basis of a spiritual
experience who decides on that basis to
go to a university and enroll in courses
studying creating a cheap way so as you
can imagine when I was a student of
these languages I would have contact
with people who had very different
belief systems very different
motivations obviously can also mean
people who are communists or far left
wingers and want to get involved with
indigenous peoples politics for those
kinds of reasons so this is my point
it's false well for one thing people are
using a false definition of nihilism
period for another thing they're using
that false definition because of the
prejudicial assumption that nihilism is
something sad and self-pitying it's a
desperate gasp for attention
it's a it's a plea from people have been
unfortunate in life who've been excluded
from a society they want to believe in
they want to participate in they've had
their belief in the good things of the
society broken shattered and if only
they could be read their head could they
have only they could have their optimism
rekindled to be brought back into this
belief system that puts atheists in
precisely the same position as true
believing Catholics and true believing
Muslims when they say the same
thing about atheists when they say all
these poor a theists they've been
unfortunate they've had their hearts
broken they've been unlucky in life if
only we could rekindle the optimism the
gratitude the faith to bring them back
into conforming with our religious
worldview our religious Society offer is
not a nihilist because he rejects the
epistemological axioms of society
no he's a nihilist because society has
rejected him nihilism is indeed a
worldview that rejects all of the
beliefs underpinning the current social
status quo in whatever society you
happen to believe it it's a challenge to
ourselves it requires a lot of strength
to really live as a nihilist because I
think there is this human tendency that
we see playing out tragically in
communist societies and fascist
societies in religious oligarchy and so
on there is this tendency to want to
cling to whatever the social group
around you presents as virtuous whatever
it is they say ought to be believed in
it's a tremendously powerful kind of
heard instinct we have and nihilists
they don't just narrowly reject the
belief in theology the belief in a god
or gods they reject all of it
[Music]